Hello, everyone.
I'm Chris Niederauer.
I'm on the GPU software team.
I'm a senior engineer there,
senior software engineer.
And I'm going to be presenting
on tuning your applications for
OpenGL on the Macintosh platform.
So, the summary of what we're going to be
doing today is I'm going to go over the
tools that you can use on our platform,
some of the Mac OS X-specific
tools that make it really easy to
debug and help with performance
in your OpenGL applications.
And then we're going to talk
a little bit about basically
building a good foundation for
your applications and a lot about
the OpenGL pipeline bottlenecks.
And special this year,
which we haven't really done in the past,
is we're actually inviting... We're
actually inviting up people who work
on the NVIDIA and the Intel GPUs,
and they're going to be giving
hints on how to use their GPUs in
particular as efficiently as possible.
But everything that they're going
to be saying is good for everybody.
So, it's a lot of good information.
So the tools on our
platform that we have.
We have, first of all,
the OpenGL Profiler,
which is basically an application-level
debugger performance tuning application.
And I'll go over these in a little bit.
And then the OpenGL Driver Monitor,
which, unlike OpenGL Profiler,
it's looking at the
driver side of things,
so sort of the information
that's reported by the driver
and potentially even some things
reported by the video card,
as you'll see in NVIDIA slides.
And then new in the seed that you have is
a new version of OpenGL Shader Builder,
which I'll show you in a second.
And then finally, our good old buddies,
Shark and Instruments.
So let's go over OpenGL Profiler.
So I was saying it's an
application-level debugger,
so it lets you do things
like set breakpoints on all
of your GL function calls.
So if you want to set a
breakpoint on CGL flush drawable,
you can basically see each
frame as it happens and look at
things like resources and state.
And then there's also special
breakpoints like software fallback.
So like here,
I set it to break on software fallback.
And then also thread
conflicts and geo errors.
So you don't have to stick a geo
get error in your code to check
for errors if you -- you know,
for performance reasons,
you don't need to stick that
geo get error in your code.
You can just run it with OpenGL Profiler,
say break on geo error,
and it will tell you exactly
when you get an error and what
kind of type of error it is.
And then also here in the
upper right-hand corner,
I'm showing the trace view,
which is showing all the OpenGL calls
that are happening and what context
they're coming from and the timing
that the application is spending while
waiting for that function to return.
So OpenGL Driver Monitor,
I'll just go over this really quickly.
Eric Klein from NVIDIA is going to go
over it a little bit more in depth.
But here we're seeing it show,
for instance,
the CPU wait time for the GPU.
And it also can show you things like
the amount of free video memory,
number of textures, things like that.
[Transcript missing]
Shark.
So everyone's probably
really familiar with this.
Hopefully they are.
But I just wanted-- I'm not
going to go over this in depth,
but it basically gives a CPU overview
of what's happening on the CPU.
And I just want to throw
out a few symbols that you
should be on the lookout for.
So for our software render library,
there's do render float.
So you'd see that in the library column.
And if you see that,
that means you're basically
somehow using a software render,
potentially for fallback.
That's not something that
you want to be doing.
Also, there's a synchronization command
with the multi-threaded OpenGL engine,
which is gle-finish-command-buffer.
And this is when you are synchronizing,
like you're trying to get
information from the OpenGL thread.
And it has to basically cause a
pipeline stall at this point to
get everything through to that
point to get some information.
And then finally, LLVM symbols.
We used to have C functions,
like GLG process pixels,
whenever you'd have a
texture conversion from,
say, one format to another format.
But now, for the software render and also
for pixel format conversions,
that sort of stuff now shows
up in SHARC as LLVM symbols.
Like here, we have an address.
And it says unknown after it.
So here we see the geo render float.
library as well.
And then instruments.
Hopefully everyone's pretty
familiar with instruments.
It's recently just added the ability
to have the exact same statistics
you have in driver monitor are
integrated into instruments.
And so you can basically
look at those side by side,
you know,
look at how the CPU usage is compared to
exactly what the driver is doing at any
And so I'm going to hand
it off to Eric Klein from
NVIDIA to go over optimizing
applications for NVIDIA hardware.
Thanks, Chris.
All right, my name's Eric Klein.
I'm a senior engineer,
senior software engineer with
NVIDIA on the Apple OpenGL team.
Today, the things that I really want to
talk about are understanding how the
driver works with modern GPU hardware.
Specifically,
I want to talk about the fast
paths through the driver and how to
avoid falling off the fast paths,
performance cliffs.
One example of that that I want
to mention is old optimizations.
Things that might have been really smart
to do in 2003 aren't smart necessarily
to do today on modern hardware.
And we'll talk more about that later,
what that means.
But I also want to note the people
this is really geared for are
Mac OpenGL developers who might not be
perfectly familiar with NVIDIA hardware
and NVIDIA drivers and how we work.
Also any Windows developers who are
new to the Mac who might be familiar
with NVIDIA stuff but not particular
to the NVIDIA driver on the Mac.
And the difference is there.
Because it's not completely there.
the same.
From a high level,
the two things that I want
to cover are NVIDIA-specific
strategies for optimization,
and I'm really focusing on
the latest hardware here,
GeForce 8 and beyond.
A lot of this applies
to previous hardware,
but it's really tailored to GeForce 8.
And I'll be talking, too,
about some of the
real-world cases we've seen,
do's and don'ts,
things that we've seen matter
in the field performance-wise.
I'll follow that up with some
profiling techniques that we're
actually using internally.
You know,
when we get an application and we
find that there's a performance bug,
I'll be talking about the things
that we sit down and do first.
So first, optimizations.
Top five performance issues we see.
Number one, poor memory usage.
This is huge.
On modern hardware,
a lot of the work we do in the driver is
actually managing the memory and trying
to do it as efficiently as possible.
There's actually a lot that you can
do in your code to use the memory
either efficiently or inefficiently,
and it can make a huge
difference in performance.
When I say huge, to give you an idea,
it can be between good and bad.
It can be an order of
magnitude in your application,
depending on what you're doing.
I think in the worst case I've ever seen,
we might have seen two orders
of magnitude for good memory
usage versus bad memory usage.
So we'll talk a lot about ways that you
can avoid falling off the fast path here,
but this is the number one thing.
Number two and three?
Thank you.
Well, yeah, you get the idea.
Obviously, you know,
there's other things wrong,
but if you don't get this right,
the other things almost don't matter.
Excessive state changes.
This can be very expensive.
There's a lot of reasons
why it's expensive,
but this is something you really want
to avoid and we'll talk about why
it's expensive and how to avoid it.
And lastly, poor use of shaders.
Modern hardware,
everything runs in shaders.
You know, vertex, geometry, fragment.
And if you're not using shaders or
you're not using them appropriately,
you're going to get
hurt performance-wise.
All right, so memory usage.
When I talk about memory,
I'm really talking about
three things primarily.
Textures, vertex data, and shaders.
Shaders I'll talk more about later,
so I'm mostly going to
ignore them at this point.
This is really focused on
textures and vertex data,
but it applies to, you know,
any buffer object.
VBO, PBO, FBO, transform feedback,
you know, whatever you're using,
it applies to this.
So the things that are
extremely expensive for us,
and this applies whether you're
talking about VRAM or SRAM.
Is creating and destroying
texture resou-- or,
well, memory resources and
mapping and unmapping.
When I talk about create and destroy,
that's pretty easy.
That's something that you
see in your application.
You know, when you create a texture,
you call-- Well, whether it's a texture
or vertex or whatever,
when you create it, when you destroy it,
you have good visibility over that.
That's expensive.
You want to do as little
of that as possible.
You want to set that up up front in
your application and not touch it again.
Mapping and unmapping,
that's a little less expensive.
That's something that is--you
have some control over.
The last presentation,
if you were here for that,
you saw some of the
mapping and unmapping.
But there's more than just that.
There's a lot that goes on
behind the scenes in the driver.
And with modern graphics hardware,
that can actually be somewhat expensive.
So you want to reduce things that
are going to cause map and unmap.
And we'll talk in a little
bit about how to do that.
But it's very important to keep
in mind that map and unmap are not
free and that they're to be avoided.
So the big things to
avoid--or not to avoid,
but the big things to avoid--
or the big solutions to this,
ways to get around these, number one,
reuse memory objects.
Make sure that you're
very stingy about them.
Create as few as you can get away with
and reuse them as much as possible.
So we'll talk about pooling quite a bit.
If you find that you're using a lot of
different textures and any given texture
you might only use for a little bit,
pool the textures.
Don't create them when you need them,
destroy them when you're done with them.
Put them into a pool,
release them when you're done,
and pull something out of
the pool when you're done.
Obviously,
that's not going to work if you
have-- wildly different texture sizes.
You know, if you're using one moment,
you know, 1920 by 1080,
and the next moment
you're using 256 by 256,
that doesn't make sense to pool if you
have really strange situations like that.
But in general, pool if you can.
Keep data on the GPU.
This is kind of a no-brainer.
Any time that you can avoid
transferring things over the bus,
that's going to save
you pretty good-- well,
that's going to save you a
pretty good performance hit
if you can keep it on the GPU.
It's also going to reduce
map speed and it's going to
reduce mapping and unmapping.
The longer something stays on the GPU and
the less it transfers back and forth,
the less mapping and unmapping
cost you're going to have.
And FBO, VBO, PBO, transform feedback,
geometry shader, these are all great ways
to keep things on the GPU.
Dynamically generated data, great.
The last thing is,
if you absolutely have to
create things per frame,
Do it at the start of the frame.
Do everything together.
The reason why is that allows the driver
to essentially batch everything up.
And we can kind of amortize the
cost of all of these things.
If we can put them together,
it's going to reduce the cost a lot.
So if you do have to do
things somewhat frequently,
batch them.
All right, note on texture formats.
We talked a little bit in
the last presentation about
recommended texture formats.
Here's a really quick list
looking through our driver of
hardware-supported formats.
There's a lot more than is on this list,
but these are kind of
the most common ones.
One thing I want to point out, too,
just as a quick note,
you'll notice on the depth components,
I didn't list depth 16.
16-bit depth components or
16-bit depth on modern hardware
isn't supported in the hardware.
That means that if you are trying to use
16-bit depth as a way to avoid on space,
as a way to avoid costs on space,
that's not going to help you because
we actually use a 24-bit depth on the
hardware and we have to do conversion,
which is going to cost you.
All right, here's the big one, locality.
People talk about locality to
mean a lot of different things.
They could mean spatial locality,
temporal locality,
lots of things like that.
I'm not talking about that here.
This is really locality
about where this lives.
Is it in the VRAM?
Is it in the SRAM?
And so on like that.
And how it's moved back and forth,
how it's stored.
You have a couple options
for controlling locality.
We recommend that you use VBOs and PBOs.
And if you are,
the usage controls the locality.
So for example,
if you call GL buffer data,
the usage argument that you pass
in there is going to control that.
Also,
you can use the Apple Client Storage and
the Texture Range extensions.
Those also give you storage hints to
specify where this is going to be stored.
So the three locality types,
and I'll talk about these right away,
are default, cached, and shared.
Default's exactly what you would expect.
If you don't do anything,
if you have just a plain, normal texture,
it gets a default format
or default locality.
You can see the--I've got kind of icons
next to each of the different layers,
a little silver icon.
That shows you each layer that can
keep a copy of the data around.
So right away,
you can see that in system memory,
we can potentially keep three copies of
the data around for default locality.
That's kind of inefficient, right?
I mean...
Potentially,
if you have a texture that's 10 megs,
we're going to take up 30 megs
just in system memory for that.
Potentially.
And then in VRAM, of course,
you'll have another 10 megs.
Also, we'll have to do copies.
The client's going to have
potentially its own copy.
When it tells the driver about this,
we copy it to the driver,
and then we have to upload it to the GPU,
so that's another copy.
So that's not the best
in certain circumstances.
Where this really shines, however,
is static data.
If you have data that you only
are going to send to the GPU once
and then use over and over again,
or if you have dynamically modified
data that the GPU is going to
be updating over and over again,
this is great.
This is actually pretty good.
We're fairly efficient about this.
And the one thing I do want to point
out is that with this locality type,
there's no pointers from the driver
back to the client's application space,
which allows the driver to
optimize in certain ways.
It's possible, and this isn't something
the driver does right now,
but it's something that we're
talking about for the future,
it's possible the driver
could actually automatically
pull these resources for you,
so that if you're doing a
lot of create and destroy,
we might be able to cut out that cost
for you if you use this locality type.
The other locality types,
you don't have that option,
and I'll tell you why in a minute.
Alright, next one is cached.
Cached is very similar to the default.
It's got a lot of the same use cases.
You want to use it for fairly
static data or GPU modified data.
The way this helps is we
only keep a copy of the data,
and the application space, essentially.
There's some caveats to that,
but basically we keep one
system memory copy of the data,
and one VRAM copy of the data.
The only copy that ever happens in this
case is from system RAM to video RAM.
It's very efficient,
and it can make a big difference
for applications that are
significantly memory bound.
Specifically, we've seen a problem
with 32-bit applications.
We've seen some 32-bit
applications that will use,
um, up their entire 4-gig memory
range just with textures,
and if you go to this,
you can cut that out significantly.
There are some limitations, though.
First of all,
the driver has a pointer going back,
potentially,
to the client's memory space,
so we can't automatically
pool these for you.
If you're going to use a lot of these,
you need to pool them yourself.
Also, limitations.
You have to use a
hardware-supported texture format.
If we have to convert from your
texture format to a texture
format the GPU supports,
we can't use this.
We have to fall back to a standard type,
or the default type.
No MIP maps, no cube maps.
Those are the big points for this one.
Finally, shared locality.
No VRAM.
This is entirely in system memory.
There's a couple implications of that.
First of all,
this is only highly dynamic data.
This is stuff that you're basically
going to modify in the CPU,
use in the GPU, discard.
Modify in the CPU, use in the GPU,
discard.
Or at least not--if not discard,
then update in the CPU again.
Again, if you're going to use these,
pool these.
Only use these for highly dynamic,
and they have the same limitations
as previously mentioned.
Hardware supported format, no mipmap,
no kubemaps.
And I'll talk a little bit more
about one of the implications
of this in a little bit.
Pagey Unlocking.
So if you've coded for OpenGL on
other systems like Linux or XP,
we don't have a virtual
VRAM system on those.
Whereas with OS X, we do.
What that means is if your card only
has 64 megs of VRAM or 128 or 1.5 gigs,
whatever it is,
your application essentially thinks
it's got an unlimited amount of VRAM.
That's great if you need to do something
that's more than your card can support
in terms of total overall VRAM.
The problem is this leads to paging.
Paging is essentially if we
need more VRAM than we've got,
we've got to save off some of
the data that we have in VRAM,
back to system RAM, reallocate.
This gets very expensive quickly because
we're doing a lot of allocations,
we're doing a lot of
mapping and unmapping,
we're doing a lot of bus transfers.
So although this allows things
that are never possible before,
this also gives you performance penalties
that never rose their heads before.
So you want to avoid
paging as much as possible.
You want to live within your
means essentially for VRAM.
A lot of games go to great pains
to make sure that they live
within the VRAM on the card,
and they get very good
performance because of that.
Because if you can avoid paging,
you'll avoid most of the
mapping and unmapping activity
that we see in a lot of cases.
The other point I want to make here
is that for shared allocations,
allocations that have no VRAM,
those need to be mapped
into the GPU's address space
before the GPU can use that.
If you're not using these continually,
you know, update on CPU,
use on GPU right away,
update immediately again, back and forth,
in a very quick manner,
the driver is aggressive about
unmapping these because all of these,
when they're mapped,
essentially wire down system memory.
Wired system memory is basically bad.
I won't go into a lot of details on that,
but we do.
We try and limit wired
memory as much as possible.
So if you are going to
use shared allocations,
make sure that you're continually
using them as much as possible.
Otherwise, you're going to have a lot of
mapping and unmapping activity,
and that's going to cost you.
All right, state optimization.
The bottom line with this is don't
change state any more than you need to.
You want to organize your code so
that chunks of primitives that use
the same state render together.
If you're changing state a lot,
that's going to cause a lot of
extra activity in the driver,
what we call validation.
Validation is basically code that
the driver runs before it can send
commands to the GPU that makes sure
that all of the state is consistent
and in a format that the GPU can use.
That includes things
like compiling shaders,
making sure that the textures
are completely consistent
and so forth like that.
It's definitely not free,
so any time you can avoid validation,
that's good.
Another thing is GL flush and GL finish.
These are extremely costly.
You shouldn't use them
unless you really have to.
And GL finish, there are very,
very few good reasons
to ever use GL finish.
If you find that you need to do that,
you can use the Apple Fence extension.
I'll talk about that in a moment.
The reason these are so costly is
because we build up a command buffer
in the driver and it gets longer and
longer and longer the longer you go
without a flush or a finish or a swap.
And as soon as you call flush,
finish or swap,
we have to send that command
buffer down to the driver.
Every new command buffer that
we get has a certain amount of
overhead that's pretty much constant.
That's a context switch.
And that's expensive for us.
It's not hugely expensive,
but it's something you
want to avoid if you can.
The Apple Fence extension lets you
essentially insert a marker and say,
all right, at this point,
I'm going to check later and see
if we've finished to this point.
And it's actually fairly
effective and very efficient.
The one caveat I would say to
that is avoid calling GL finish,
Fence Apple before you've
called flush or swap.
If you do that,
that's essentially going to force a
flush and you've lost your benefit
unless you really need to do it.
Again, all these things,
if you really need to do something,
do it, but be careful about it.
Textures.
We talked a little bit
about textures with memory,
but there's some other things that
are also worth thinking about.
In the past,
it was most efficient to use Power of
Two and non-rectangle formats because
of certain spatial locality tricks
that we could do in the hardware.
Today, with modern hardware,
this isn't true so much anymore.
You don't need to stick to Power of Two.
You don't need to stick to rectangle.
We're very efficient about
how we use things spatial
locality-wise in the driver.
And also, it's perfectly efficient these
days to render to an FBO.
It used to be that with an FBO,
it wasn't as efficient to render to as,
for example, a normal drawable.
That's not the case anymore.
Rendering to an FBO today is pretty
much the same cost as a drawable.
So don't be shy about that
if that was a concern.
Float formats?
Use them if you need them.
Floats are great,
but if you don't need floats,
if you don't need that
level of precision,
don't use it.
It's going to cost you more in
the shader and also the cache.
Float formats are great,
but if you don't need floats,
if you don't need that
level of precision,
don't use it.
The float formats are just larger,
and so you're going to fit a lot
less of the texture in the cache.
A couple obvious things.
Textures.
Anytime you change the size, the format,
number of MIP levels,
things like that with the texture,
that triggers a lot of work.
So with textures,
set them up the way you need
them and leave them alone.
Do all that sort of stuff at
the start of your application.
Also, when you're copying things,
if you need to use copy text image,
text image, anything like that,
use the subversion.
If you can stick to small regions,
that's obviously going to be a better
win than doing the whole thing.
Fairly obvious.
Programmability.
This is a basic point.
Everything in the
hardware today is shaders.
The hardware natively
uses microcode for vertex,
geometry, fragment, anything like that.
If you're still using fixed
function for any reason,
you're taking a perf hit.
You might think that, well,
it's really simple,
it's really straightforward,
obviously that's going to be efficient.
It's not, because the driver actually
has to create a fixed function
shader and compile it for you.
If you change that fixed function state,
it's very expensive.
That means texture environment,
register combiner, texture shader,
materials, fog, hardware fog type things,
all that, that's not a fixed
function thing anymore,
so you don't want to use it.
And by the way,
that's true for GeForce 6 and beyond,
not just GeForce 8 and beyond.
Lastly,
for programmability and validation,
this is kind of an obvious point,
but change your shaders
as little as possible.
Every time you change the shader,
that causes a recompile.
A little bit less obviously,
some kinds of state,
when you change state,
also causes the shader recompile.
Certain texture features,
things like that, if you change,
it causes the shader recompile.
So really the big point is set everything
up in the beginning and leave it alone.
I know I keep saying that,
but that's huge.
One last minor,
minor point is priming GLBGN.
When you set up a lot of state,
including your shaders,
we don't necessarily do a lot of
work in the driver at that point.
A lot of the work in the driver
happens when you go to do the first
rendering command that uses that state.
We've seen actually in some real
world cases that if you wait
until your application's actually
running to use this stuff,
you can get a stutter on your first
frame or the first frame that uses this.
So if you want to avoid that,
you can send down just a bogus little
GLBGN to draw some minor quad that's
going to force this state to be
validated and the shader to be compiled.
For most people it doesn't matter,
but it might matter for your application.
Last couple general optimizations.
We talked about context switching.
Context switching is very
expensive and you want to avoid it.
Well,
one really simple way to avoid that is
don't use more contexts than you need.
We've seen some real-world examples
of apps using a lot of contexts.
I mean, in some cases,
we've seen one context per frame.
The idea is trying to isolate
state from one frame to another,
but that's a huge performance cliff.
I mean, it's really massive.
So don't do that.
That thrashes memory,
that thrashes state,
that thrashes all kinds of
things and you're going to hurt.
Another thing,
this is kind of a favor to some
people internally on our driver team.
This is a pet peeve that
we get all the time.
GL renderer string.
Don't use that to check
for functionality.
We see people saying, "Oh, you know,
is this G46?" Because I know
G46 has this particular feature.
And then when they get to G48,
their code is suddenly saying, "Oh, wait,
it's not G46.
It doesn't have that feature."
And they fall back to some old code.
That's not the way to do things.
If you absolutely have to
check for a particular card,
use the render ID.
That's not going to change
over time or driver to driver.
But the recommended thing to do,
check for extensions.
Look at the extension string.
That's really going to tell
you what you need to know.
So learn to rely on that.
And lastly, if you're writing a game,
this is pretty obvious,
but use full screen.
At least as the default thing.
Full screen is a lot more efficient
because you're going to be the only
context on the system probably.
You're not going to be fighting
with the Windows Server,
or any other applications for resources.
So it's going to run faster.
And then, of course, full screen,
we're actually going to be using flipping
with the frame buffer and not blitting.
And so that's kind of like the
difference between changing
pointers and copying a whole array.
Much more efficient.
All right, that's it for optimizations.
Now, bottleneck identification.
These are the techniques that
we're actually using internally.
So I'm not going to go really
in-depth on the basic methodology.
This is really well covered elsewhere.
But this is just kind
of a high-level view,
the first things to look at.
You know, open up Activity Monitor.
See what Activity Monitor tells you.
If your CPU seems to
not be doing very much,
then there's a lot of things it could be.
You could be GPU-bound,
you could be bus-bound,
you could be memory system-bound.
Next thing to open up at that
point is OpenGL Driver Monitor and
look at the activity on the GPU.
If the GPU is also not using, you know,
very high utilization,
you're probably bus or memory-bound.
But either way, at this point,
you move on to fine
bottleneck identification.
The fine bottleneck identification can
seem pretty blunt force in some ways.
The reason I say that is because you're
basically turning things on and off,
scaling things up and down,
and seeing when your performance changes.
So, for example, simplify your shaders.
You may have some really fancy shader
that does all sorts of complex math.
Well, do something really simple.
Make it output red.
You know, whatever it is,
dumb it down and see if
your performance changes.
If suddenly your frame rate jumps way
up when you dumbed your shader down,
well, your shader limited.
Alter your geometry complexity.
If you're using some
sort of model that's got,
you know, 10 million vertices,
drop it down to a much
lower level of detail,
you know, maybe 1,000 vertices.
See if your frame rate goes up.
If it does, you're geometry-bound.
Modern hardware,
it's very hard to get geometry.
You can't get geometry-bound,
but it's possible.
What's much more likely is
that you're fragment-bound.
So alter your resolution.
If you're running at 1920x1080,
scale back to 640x480.
That's where a lot of
things you're going to see,
you're suddenly going
to get much better perf.
That means probably that you
need to change your pixel shader.
You need to change textures you're using.
You get the idea.
There's a lot of things that you
can change and tweak within your
system to get better perf or to
figure out where your bottleneck is.
I'm not going to go into
a lot more detail on this,
but see the "NVIDIA Practical
Performance Analysis Guide." We've
got a really good tutorial on how to
go through and find your bottlenecks
using this sort of methodology.
So when it comes down to
actually profiling on the system,
with OS X, there are certain things
you need to keep in mind.
And these kind of hold true
for any operating system,
but these things are
what we look at first.
First of all, any periodic tasks that
you've got in the OS system,
in the OS,
dial this back as much as possible.
Power management, screen saver,
software update,
any applications you've got
running in the background,
turn these things off.
Dial them down.
I'm not saying turn these off forever,
just while you're profiling.
Now, obviously,
you want these things on in general.
And also, keep in mind that your user is
going to have these things on.
So it's no good if your app runs really
great with power management turned off,
because your users are going
to have that turned on.
But for profiling, it's useful.
Also, if you have the luxury of running
in full screen for profiling,
do it.
That eliminates a lot of noise.
You're not going to be competing
with the Windows server.
with any other OpenGL apps.
You're going to be the only app
on the system graphics-wise.
And that's going to
help you with profiling.
If you're not a full screen app,
if you can't do that,
here's an NVIDIA-specific
trick you can do.
If you look in system library extensions,
there's a file called gforcega.plugin.
That basically,
the presence of that turns on
Windows server acceleration.
That does a bunch of other things,
but if you rename that just temporarily
and reboot or restart the Windows server,
your app will be the only thing
using OpenGL on the system.
You'll be the only graphics context,
and that'll help you isolate.
Obviously, when you're done,
you want to rename that back.
The last thing to mention
is power management.
There's a periodic, well not periodic,
there's a continual background
process in the OS that looks
at the busyness of the GPU.
It looks at how much activity
is going on in the GPU and
if the GPU isn't very busy,
it throttles it back.
The reason I mention that
is because you can see weird
kind of spiky perf over time.
One run will show 130 frames a second,
the next run will show 110.
And it'll be really hard to figure
out why if you don't keep in
mind that this could be an issue.
It's not usually a big issue.
The main time it can be an issue
is if your app doesn't always
use the GPU to its fullest.
For example, if you're CPU bound,
this could be raising its head,
so it's something to keep in mind.
All right, OpenGL Driver Monitor.
This is a very, very valuable tool.
This is one of your best ways to get an
idea of what's going on inside the GPU.
It doesn't tell you
what the GPU is doing,
however.
It only tells you how hard the
GPU is doing whatever it's doing.
That can still be very useful, though,
to identify whether you're CPU-bound
or GPU-bound and a lot of other things.
OpenGL Driver Monitor also you
can access through Instruments,
so if you like Instruments,
it's available there.
These are kind of just a quick list of
the things that I find most useful when
I need to go in and profile something.
The top three that I've listed here are
ones that are actually NVIDIA-specific.
They're in the snow leopard seed,
if you have that,
and they'll be in drivers that are
going to be coming out in the future.
These three basically give you
core utilization on the GPU.
This is the core number that
you want to look at that says,
how busy is the GPU?
It's a percentage.
Next down is memory utilization.
This is basically how busy is
the memory system on the GPU?
You know,
how much VRAM activity is going on?
And then finally,
video engine utilization.
You know,
if you're working on a video app
that's using QuickTime or anything
that's using the GPU's video engines,
like VP1, VP3, anything like that,
this will give you an idea of
how hard that's working and can
help you figure out bottlenecks
for underutilization there.
A couple other quick things, textures,
surfaces,
you can get counts of all of that.
Here's where you can find out
how much paging you're doing.
You can look at page on,
page off for textures and surfaces.
That'll give you a very good idea.
If you see that number really high, well,
you've probably fallen
off a minor perf cliff,
or potentially a very big perf cliff,
depending on what your usage pattern is.
You can see how much AGP memory,
which really translates in
this case to system memory,
is mapped into the GPU.
That'll help figure out if
you're using a lot of that,
and that could also be a
mapping and unmapping issue.
There's a lot of things
I would really just strongly
encourage you to play with this.
This is a very simple thing.
This is a very powerful tool.
And as time goes by,
we'll be adding more statistics,
and so it'll be even
more powerful over time.
OpenGL Driver Monitor Example.
The main reason I include this,
most of you are probably
familiar with it.
In the lower right-hand corner,
you'll notice a little
button that says Parameters.
If I've been away from this for
four or five months and I come back,
I always forget how to
open the tray on the right.
I'm like, "Oh man,
how do I get that thing
open?" Click that button.
Sorry, it's, yeah.
All right, Shark.
If you're CPU bound,
if you're trying to figure out
what's going on in the CPU,
Shark is the very best tool you have.
Shark is amazingly awesome.
Go kiss the Shark team when you see them.
However,
there are a couple things in Shark that
are maybe not standard for most
developers that I want to recommend.
If you're profiling OpenGL stuff,
the standard time profile is cool.
That will help a lot.
But all thread states is awesome.
All thread states, basically,
the difference between that and normal
time profile is normal time profile
and the rest of the team.
It's a very complex and powerful tool,
so I'm not going to get into it here.
Mostly I want you to know that it exists.
And if you're curious, go explore.
Window Time Facility is also useful.
Again,
I'm not going to go into a lot of detail.
I mostly want you to
know that this exists.
To use these modes,
you actually have to do a lot more
data mining to make use of it than
with just standard time profile,
but the payoff is huge.
It's something that if
you have a spare hour,
go do it.
If you've got a spare day, even better.
Get very familiar with it.
I'm going to go ahead and do this because
the more familiar you are with this,
the easier your profiling will get.
and Data Mining.
I just wanted to show the Data Mining
tab over on the side here.
The Data Mining is absolutely
essential for all thread states.
So experiment with the
Data Mining in particular.
There are a lot of things that I turn on.
One of my favorite things is
actually color by library,
so I can just tell really quickly at a
glance which library is causing me pain.
Show all branches is also very powerful.
Again, I can't cover everything,
but experiment.
All right, finishing up,
most important things
I want you to take home.
Shaders, textures and contexts
are very heavyweight.
Set these up in the beginning,
leave them alone as much as you can.
Every time you have to touch these,
you're hurting your performance.
Reuse.
Anything you can do to reuse these
are going to be huge for you.
Some apps, I can guarantee you will see a
10-time improvement just by reuse.
Not every app.
I mean, a lot of games already use
things very efficiently,
but look at your own situation and see.
You might be able to help.
And finally, keeping data on the GPU.
You know,
the last talk we talked about transform
feedback and geometry shaders.
Those are great ways to
dynamically generate data.
The more you can keep it on the GPU,
the better you're going to
be in terms of performance.
A couple resources that you
might want to look at later.
I talked a little bit about the Practical
Performance Analysis Guide from NVIDIA,
also the GPU Programming Guide.
Those are very useful.
Apple has a lot of documentation
up online for optimizing OpenGL and
the tools that are Apple-specific.
Very helpful documents,
so I suggest you go look.
All right,
I'm going to hand back to Chris.
Thanks, Eric.
So that was a lot of great
information that helps both with
NVIDIA as well as everything else.
But that's a lot of great
info for tuning your apps.
So we already went over bottlenecks,
but I'm going to go a
little bit more over it.
The major bottlenecks tend to be the CPU,
the bus bandwidth, traffic back and forth
talking to the GPU.
And then there's also
pipeline and data stalls,
basically,
where you can have bubbles in one of
your threads or on the GPU and the CPU.
And then also, as Eric already went over,
the GPU has vertex processing
and then the fill rate.
And you can basically see
if you're one of those two.
You want to experiment to
see if you're one of those,
bound by one of those two.
And then also, Srinivas,
who works on the Intel graphics.
He's going to give a lot
more hints on fill rate.
So for CPU,
I just wanted to give some hints in
addition to what's already been said.
Other than using Shark,
what you find out, you attack with Shark,
if you see that you're CPU bound,
there's some other helpful hints here.
And so one thing is using
a 64-bit application,
actually compiling your
application to 64-bit.
So why build 64-bit?
What's it going to do to speed you up?
Well, obviously,
there's the fact that you can
use much bigger data sets.
So if you are using a large data set
that's more than the 2 gigs or 4 gigs
that you're able to fit into RAM,
you can use a 64-bit and
it will actually help,
you know, you won't have to be doing
any paging at that point.
And then also,
something that's a little bit
less known is that it actually,
when you're using x86-64,
the Intel chip has more optimal
instructions for larger data,
you know, 64-bit.
And also, in addition to that,
it has more registers
available on the CPU.
So basically,
code goes a little bit faster
just by compiling in 64-bit.
And in addition to your
application being 64-bit,
the OpenGL engine and also the graphics
drivers below that are also going to
be running on the 64-bit versions,
which in hand have the exact
same performance benefits.
[Transcript missing]
I'm going to go over in a second,
basically, avoiding stalls with data
synchronization and basically
by double buffering objects.
And I just wanted to reiterate
that this is sort of,
you know, it's a balancing act,
trying to make sure that
the CPU and the GPU,
they're both very capable things,
so you want to be using
them as much as possible.
Not causing stalls on one or the other.
So here we have an example of a
texture object that we're modifying
a texture on the CPU and then using
that texture to draw with on the GPU.
And we see here that we're actually
getting some bubbles in the pipeline.
So the CPU doesn't have
anything to do while the GPU is
drawing with that texture.
And meanwhile, when we get that texture,
when we're able to write
into that texture again,
the GPU is then waiting for us
to upload that second texture.
So a trick to do -- you know,
this is what -- basically
what double buffering is,
is you can add a second object in
here to fill in those pipeline stalls.
And so what you're doing here is it's --
while the GPU is working on one texture,
the CPU gets to work
on the other texture.
And you basically flip-flop
the two between each other.
And doing this allows you to much
more easily -- more efficiently
basically get rid of those pipeline
stalls that are existing for,
you know, texture objects,
even vertex objects,
vertex buffer objects,
that sort of thing.
And so bandwidth-wise,
I wanted to reiterate
what's been said a lot,
you know, in every single
OpenGL session that we've had.
And that is do not use immediate
mode vertex submission.
Geo begin, geo end is basically,
it's a very inefficient way to do things.
And what it's doing is basically
every single time you call geo vertex,
we're sending this call,
we're sending the data associated
with that vertex over the bus
to the vertex processing unit,
where then it's going to be using those,
that data to process.
And that's just not an efficient
way to get the data to the GPU.
So instead, we're obviously recommending
vertex buffer objects for
pretty much everything.
So here we see in the VRAM on the GPU,
In the video memory,
we have a buffer object
that we've created or buffer
objects that we've created.
And so similar to like a texture,
we have this buffer object
with vertex data in it.
And so we can just literally,
it will just put it over the
extremely fast bus that's on the GPU.
There's no bus traffic between the
CPU and the GPU being used here.
And the vertex processor
is able to basically,
you know,
get that data as fast as possible.
And so also with dynamic vertex data,
you can create vertex buffer objects
that are dynamic or streaming.
And so what happens in these situations
is that you have your CPU copy,
but only when you update things,
it's able to actually blip the entire,
it's able to copy all of your vertex
data at once into the GPU's video memory,
as opposed to with the media
mode where we're putting one
vertex on the GPU at a time.
This basically does a mem
copy straight onto the GPU.
And then I wanted to talk a little
bit about flush buffer range,
how that works.
So in general, so when you're trying
to get your vertex data,
when you're going to modify it,
if it's dirty on the video card,
it's going to be read back
to the CPU at that point.
But after this happens,
I have the objects.
And say I want to,
without Apple flush buffer range,
say I want to modify one of my objects.
So I'll modify that object.
And
After I'm done modifying that object,
it then copies the entire
buffer object back up there.
But I was only modifying
a small amount of it.
So,
What Apple Flush Buffer
Range allows me to do is I'm
modifying two small parts here,
for instance,
and I call flush mapped buffer range on
both of those sub ranges of that object,
un-map my object, and then at that point,
only those two small sub ranges
would have been modified.
So it's a much more efficient way to,
if you are only modifying small
sub ranges of your buffer objects,
you can just use this extension
to easily speed that up.
[Transcript missing]
Hi, everybody.
My name is Srinivas Dasari.
I work in the GPU software team at Apple.
Today I want to go through some tips
for getting better performance on X3100.
This is the integrated graphics from
Intel that is used in MacBook and
MacBook Air product lines.
Today I want to give you a brief
overview of X3100 and its architecture.
I want to go through state management
and why it is actually crucial
for getting performance on X3100.
Eric Klein from NVIDIA already
gave you a lot of details on
state management and how state
changes can affect GPU performance.
I'm going to reiterate
those points some more,
but within the context of
X3100 and its architecture.
This hardware is especially
tend to be fill rate limited.
So I'm going to go through some
tips for getting better fill rates.
Also, we support some API features that
can help you with performance.
So I'm going to go
through those features.
And then finally,
I'm going to cover some general hints
for do's and don'ts that help you with
performance in general on this hardware.
So X3100 is what is known as
unified memory architecture.
There is no dedicated video memory
like it exists for other GPUs.
A portion of the system
memory is allocated as video
memory for graphics purposes.
[Transcript missing]
So, state management.
So, because the driver has to generate
and compile these kernel programs
for each stage of the pipeline,
state management becomes very crucial
for performance on this hardware.
So, it's very important to
avoid state thrashing.
By thrashing,
I mean toggling state back and forth.
Because transitions are very
expensive on this hardware,
they can force kernel program
recompiles on the driver,
which is an expensive operation.
But the driver does have a number
of optimizations to cache the
kernel programs and the state to
avoid and reduce the recompiles.
But the amount of checking the driver has
to do to make sure if a particular kernel
program needs to be compiled or not can
really add up and become a bottleneck.
And also, there is a limit to the
amount of caching we can do.
And also, too many state transitions can
result in too many state vectors.
So, hardware requires the driver to
maintain a state vector heap.
Basically,
the state heap contains all the
required state as well as kernel
programs that are required to
finish a particular draw operation.
So,
if there are too many state transitions,
it can result in too many state vectors.
That means we may have to grow
the state heap at some point.
And we have to, at some point,
we run out of state heaps.
So, we have to reallocate heaps.
So, that will result in full
pipeline flushes in the hardware.
Which are very important.
So, we have to reallocate heaps.
So, that will result in full
pipeline flushes in the hardware.
And these are very expensive.
So, it's very important to be
efficient in doing state
transitions and state management.
If you can sort your state
to reduce transitions,
that is actually a great win for
performance on this hardware.
This hardware, especially because of
its hybrid architecture,
tend to be field rate limited.
There are some obvious things you can do.
Minimize the resolution of the textures,
reducing the size of your render targets.
That way you are filling
up fewer number of pixels.
That helps.
Also,
if you can get away with 16-bit bits
per pixel as opposed to 24- and 32-bit,
that helps with memory bandwidth.
So are the compressed textures,
which are currently
supported on this hardware.
You can do other things like
using the LOD bias controls,
for example.
Choose a smaller size MIP map.
This helps you with the
better texture cache reuse.
Of course,
if you are using a smaller size MIP map,
then you are actually increasing
the blurring in your scene.
So if you can get away
with some blurring,
maybe you can go for a
smaller size MIP map.
That helps.
Another important thing is
to simplify the shaders.
The simpler the shaders,
the better it is,
especially on this hardware.
Because it's going to keep your
compute time within reason.
And also it is going to free up
the cores for other threads to run.
So it helps.
In particular, if possible,
if you can avoid these complex math
instructions that I just listed here,
that is actually very
helpful on this hardware.
Because there is only one
math box unit that is there
to do these math instructions.
And that math box unit is
actually shared by all cores.
And also almost all these
instructions take multiple rounds.
So you need to compute multiple rounds
to the math box unit to compute.
So the more of these
instructions you use,
the more likelihood
of introducing stalls.
So this is something to keep in mind when
you are programming to this hardware.
Also, this hardware supports what
is called the early-Z feature.
That is,
the hardware is capable of rejecting
pixels that fail the depth test
before running a frame rate shader.
This can actually give you
substantial gain in performance,
especially if depth complexity
in your scene is high.
Usually, I mean,
this feature automatically
kicks in whenever possible,
but there are certain OpenGL states that
can actually disable this LDZ testing.
For example, one such case is if the
fragment shader manipulates Z.
Basically, what that means is instead of
using the interpolated depth,
you are actually calculating your
own depth in the fragment shader.
That is, you are doing your own Z testing
in the fragment shader.
Then, obviously,
the hardware doesn't know,
have access to the source depth,
so it can't do the early Z test
before the fragment shader is run.
So,
it has to disable the early Z testing.
Another condition is if you have stencil
writes enabled and also your stencil
G fail operation is not set to GL keep,
meaning that whenever a
pixel fails the depth test,
you want to update the stencil buffer.
Now, the hardware is actually
capable of doing that.
That is, as soon as a pixel
fails the early Z test,
it can update the stencil buffer.
But if you have alpha testing enabled,
or if you are killing pixels
in the fragment shader,
So in these conditions,
even though the pixel
fails the early-Z test,
the hardware can't immediately update the
stencil buffer because it doesn't know
if the pixel is going to get killed by
the alpha test or in the fragment shader.
So it has to run the fragment
shader and go through the pipeline.
So you won't get benefit out
of this hardware feature.
So if you can avoid these two conditions,
actually you can take advantage
of this early-Z hardware.
Also, there are some common ways in
which actually you can take
advantage of early-Z hardware.
One is to draw the scene front to back.
So if you can sort your scene and draw
the objects that are on the front first,
that will help you initialize
the depth buffer with the
Z values of all visible pixels.
And then you draw the
objects that are in the back,
then they get early rejected because
they're going to fail the early-Z test.
For example, I have a case here.
The red triangle is in the front,
the blue is in the back,
and it's occluded by the red.
So if I draw the red first,
it's going to update the depth buffer
with the Z values of the red triangle.
And then I go draw the
blue triangle next,
it's going to get early rejected because
it's going to fail the early-Z test.
So this is one way to
take advantage of it.
There's another common way is
to do a multi-pass approach.
Do a depth-only pass first,
and then follow by the color pass.
So with the depth pass,
you disable the color rights.
You just draw the whole scene.
That way you are populating
the depth buffer with the
Z values of all visible pixels.
And then you could do a color pass,
then all the pixels that are occluded,
they get early rejected.
So this technique can bring the depth
complexity in your scene to almost one.
So it can give you substantial
gain in fill rates.
But how much gain you actually
get out of these techniques,
it depends on what kind of overhead
is involved in doing these techniques.
And what kind of overhead is
involved in doing these techniques.
And what kind of performance
you get out of early-Z hardware.
For example,
if your fragment share is simple,
then you may not get any benefit or
much benefit out of early-Z hardware.
In those cases,
if you do these techniques,
then the overhead itself
can become a bottleneck.
So you need to balance the overhead
with the kind of performance
you get with early-Z hardware.
We currently support occlusion queries.
This is one good way extension to use.
You can follow the normal bounding
box techniques to only draw those
portions of the scene that are visible.
This definitely helps you with frame
rates because you are not drawing certain
parts of the scene that are not visible,
which is good.
Also, there's one tidbit.
If you can combine the color depth
stencil clears into one GL clear call,
that helps because the driver can
just do all of these in one operation.
If you separate them out,
then it results in three different
operations in the driver.
Something to keep in mind.
[Transcript missing]
So finally, whatever I explained so
far is pretty general.
So most of it applies to any GPU.
But it's even more helpful on
this particular hardware because
of its unique architecture.
Thank you.
Thank you for listening.
I'm back with Chris, I guess.
Thank you.
So that's great, Srinivas.
So...
Let's see.
So we've talked a lot about
general optimizations and even got
NVIDIA and Intel-specific hints.
They're great to use in general.
So for any more information,
Alan Schaefer is our evangelist
for graphics technology.
His email is here,
aschaefer at apple.com.
And also, documentation.
We've got a lot of documentation
at developer.apple.com/opengl.
And so I recommend that
everyone takes a look there,
especially like at the
Mac OS X OpenGL Programming Guide,
especially if you're new to Mac OS X.
So some related sessions.
There aren't really-- this
is the last OpenGL session.
Hopefully you saw the
earlier two OpenGL sessions.
But tomorrow,
there's introducing OpenCL and
Advanced OpenCL both in
Russian Hill at 9:00 and 10:15 AM.
So if you are interested in doing
computation-type stuff on the
GPU and seeing potentially how to
also integrate that with OpenGL,
those should be shown at
those sessions tomorrow.
And then we have a lab tomorrow
as well for the OpenGL on the Mac.
And that is at the same time, I think,
as an OpenCL lab as well
that's across from it.
I'm not exactly sure
where it is right now.
But it's at the same time,
2:00 to like 6:15, something like that.
And if you have a question
that's too complex or not enough
time to get the question today,
you can always meet us tomorrow then.